# Dispatching 3000 HTTPS requests/second on a $6 VM

Sometimes I can see small peaks of visits to this blog, especially when a post
reaches sites like e.g. Reddit or
HackerNews. But the extra amount of load never spends a significant amount of server resources.
Thinking about that, a question came to my mind: how many requests/second would my blog be able to dispatch
with decent response times?

The engine running this blog does not use any kind of database but just the
file system. The blog loads all the
contents from the disk, renders the Markdown files, and stores them along with
the rest of assets in an LRU cache that, given the small size of this blog,
fits in few megabytes of main memory.

Given the small traffic that this blog receives (few tenths of users every day), my
$6/month [droplet at DigitalOcean](https://www.digitalocean.com/) is usually
under 3% of its single vPCU consumption and at 50% of its 1GB of memory.
Concretely, according to my [New Relic Infrastructure monitor](https://newrelic.com),
the `goblog` process running this blog is normally near 0% of CPU and using
around 50MB of memory (for both the code and the cached data).

Responding to that question allowed me to start learning the basics of [K6](https://k6.io/),
to simulate the connection of multiple users to different pages of my blog.

So I first created this Javascript file:

```javascript
import http from 'k6/http';
import {sleep} from 'k6';

export const options = {
  vus: 200,
  duration: '5m',
};


const urlGroups = [ /* list of URLs */ ];

export default function () {
  let idx = Math.floor(Math.random() * urlGroups.length);
  let urlGroup = urlGroups[idx];
  urlGroup.forEach(http.get);
}
```

The `urlGroups` is a 2D array where each first-level entry is an array to the
URLs of the payloads that a typical browser would get. For example a URL for
for a blog post plus the URLs to the files/images it links.

The `options` array means that we would simulate 200 virtual users (VUs)
continuously connecting to any random entry in the `urlGroups` list, during 5
minutes.

Running the above script from my laptop wouldn't allow me to send
enough load to the server, so I installed the [K6 operator](https://github.com/grafana/k6-operator)
on a 3x16CPUs Kubernetes cluster, copied the previous script in the ConfigMap
and deployed the following file:

```yaml
apiVersion: k6.io/v1alpha1
kind: K6
metadata:
  name: k6-sample
spec:
  parallelism: 48
  script:
    configMap:
      name: my-stress-test
      file: script.js
```

Running `kubectl get jobs` in the namespace I deployed the K6 instance shows a
list of jobs that are running the 48 load generators. When they finish, each
pod prints its connection statistics, so you need to manually aggregate them
to get the global results. I did it with a few of Bash:

```bash
# Merge all the results from the logs into a single file
kubectl logs -l k6_cr=k6-sample --tail=20 > results.txt
# Filter the metrics lines, get the reported metric, and aggregate it
grep http_reqs results.txt | awk '{ print $2 }' | awk '{sum += $1;} END {print sum;}'
grep data_received results.txt | awk '{ print $2 }' | awk '{sum += $1;} END {print sum;}'
```

The results were, for both 200 and 1000 Virtual Users:

| Metric                  | Value for 200 Virtual Users / |  Value for 1000 Virtual Users   |
|-------------------------|:-----------------------------:|:-------------------------------:|
| HTTP request duration   | 94ms (median)<br/>103ms (p95) | 299ms (median)<br/>520ms (p95)  |
| Requests/second         |             2100              |              2924               |
| Data received           |             24 GB             |             33,6 GB             |
| System CPU              |              84%              |              100%               |
| System Memory           |              61%              |               66%               |
| `goblog` process CPU    |              48%              |               56%               |
| `goblog` process Memory |             95 MB             |             134 MB              |

Clearly the `goblog` process is limited by the fact of being running in a Virtual Machine with
a single vCPU and having to share it with other services in the system (e.g. the blog logs each
request into a file that makes the `systemd-journald` service to spend 10% of
the CPU during the high load scenario). Even it has to share the CPU time with 
the Garbage Collector that is provided by its own Go runtime.

## Conclusion

Given the low traffic of this blog, being able to dispatch near 3000 requests per
second is by far, more than enough.

However, if I wanted to increase the accepted requests per second,
I could still do some actions before migrating to a bigger VM:

* Optimize some services in my operating system. I didn't spent much time
  on it.
* Reduce the size of the the returned payloads: compact HTMLs, compress images,
  use CDN URLs for third-party libraries...

After few minutes of load testing I spent around 6% of my monthly network transfer limit
(1,000 GB). Before publishing this article I decided to implement a [per-client
rate limiter](https://github.com/mariomac/goblog/commit/b769f5dce86817b0696e9cc5684c92064038e359),
to avoid that few uncautious readers drain my network quota by trying to reproduce
the above experiments 😅.

Try to refresh compulsively this page and you'll end up
receiving a nice [HTTP 429 error](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/HTTP/Status/429).
You will be able to refresh again after few seconds of inactivity.
